README.md, before:

# CS-Script - VSCode Extension (CS-Script.VSCode)

Execution, debugging and editing C# code that targets .NET and Mono (no .NET Core required).     
<hr/>
Note this extension depends on "ms-vscode.mono-debug" and "ms-vscode.csharp". Thus if these extensions are installed/function incorrectly please log error reports at their web sites.    
<hr/>
Currently VSCode support for C# is heavily oriented on development for .NET Core (e.g. ASP.NET Core). This imposes serious limitations on developers who is developing for desktop and server using C#. This project is aiming for filling this gap.

The extension is powered by the [CS-Script engine](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script/blob/master/README.md) - popular Open Source script engine that delivers Python scripting experience but for C# syntax. CS-Script uses ECMA-compliant C# as a programming language and it can be hosted by applications or run standalone. CS-Script is already a core of the plugins for some other popular editors/IDEs: 

- Sublime Text 3 - [CS-Script.ST3](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script-sublime/blob/master/README.md) 
- Notepad++  -  [CS-Script.Npp](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.npp/blob/master/README.md)
- Visual Studio 2015/2017 - [CS-Script.VSIX](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/CS-Script.VSIX/blob/master/README.md)

The extension provides a very thin layer of own functionality. Its primary responsibility is bringing together OmniSharp IntelliSense services, a full scale debugger (curtesy of "Mono Debug" team) and CS-Script seamless C# script execution. This page contains only a light overview of the extension functionality. The complete description can be found at the [project Wiki](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/wiki).

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

<hr>

## Minimal set of dependencies (third-party extensions)
Latest Mono from http://www.mono-project.com/download/ and the following VSCode extensions:

Note, you may need to add Mono to the system path manually if it didn't happen for you during the Mono installation. 

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/dependencies.png)
<hr>

## Functionality

- _**Editing**_ <br>
All C# editing support available with OmniSharp, including Syntax Highlighting, IntelliSense, Go to Definition, Find All References, etc.

- _**Debugging**_<br>
Debugging support for .NET (Mono and Desktop CLR). This is something that currently  is impossible with other extensions.

- _**Execution**_<br>
All CS-Script features:
    - Direct execution of "plain vanilla" C# files without defining any project infrastructure.
    - Converting/Building a script into an assembly or a self contained executable.
    - Inclusion of the dependency scripts via CS-Script directives:
        - Importing other C# scripts
        - Referencing assemblies either explicitly or implicitly via automatic resolving namespaces into assemblies
        - Referencing NuGet packages

- _**Portability**_<br>
The extension is supported on all OSs where VSCode can run.

### **Road map (highlights)**
Below are the road map highlights only. Some more detailed information are available in the last section of this document.
- Add support fro C# 7 just out of box. (**_Done in v1.2.0_**)
- Add toolbar buttons for most frequent CS-Script commands. (**_Done in v1.2.0_**)
- Adding a [custom view](https://code.visualstudio.com/updates/v1_13#_custom-views)  containing all script dependencies (e.g. imported scripts, DLLs) (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Integrate CS-Script specific autocompletion with default C# autocompletion (OmniSharp). (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Integrate CS-Script run/debug commands with the default launch actions. (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Allow fallback autocompletion (similar to Sublime Text) when OmniSharp is not activated.
- Allow OmniSharp autocompletion to be integrated without loading the folder. May not be possible due to the OmniSharp limitations.  

<hr>

## C# scripting with VSCode

_CS-Script.VSCode_ allows convenient editing and execution of the C# code directly from the editor. A "C# script" is a file containing any ECMA-compliant C# code. While other C# based runtimes require C# code to be compiled into assemblies CS-Script allows direct C# execution by generating the assemblies on-fly. Thus you don't need to have any script specific configuration for executing your script. A single script file is fully sufficient as it contains everything that CS-Script needs to know to execute the script.

When your C# script depend on other (source code or compiled) C# modules you can express this in your code in a very simple way via `//css_*` directives. These directives are conceptually similar to Python `import *`, which appear on top of the script. CS-Script has only a handful directives that are easy to remember. And of course you can find the complete CS-Script documentation on GigHub: https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script/wiki

The following is the overview of the CS-Script functionality available with VS Code. The overview also highlights the major CS-Script featured:

Note: the most frequently used CS-Script command can also be accessed directly via toolbar buttons without using 'command palette': 

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/toolbar.png)

Be aware that apart from allowing typical C# Intellisense this extension also provides C-Script specific code assistance features (mouse hover, go-to-definition and autocompletion):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

## Usage

_**Installing**_<br>
While the extension is already published on VSCode marketplace it may take some time until it becomes publicly available. Until then you can install the extension from VSIX (from GitGub).

_**Executing**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: run`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "run" command (Ctrl+F5):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_run1.gif)

_**Check for syntax errors**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: check`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "check" command (F7):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_check.gif)

_**Debugging**_<br>
_Command: `Debug: Start Debugging`<br>_
Open the C# file and load it with "cs-script: load project" command (Ctrl+F7). After that you can start debugging the same way as with any VSCode workspace/language: by pressing F5 (Debug: Start Debugging command):

_**Debugging (without workspace)**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: debug`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "debug" command (Alt+F5):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_debug1.gif)

_**Managing Dependencies**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: print project`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "print project" command (Alt+F7):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_projA.gif)


![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_projB.gif)

_**Using CS-Script IntelliSense**_<br>
_Command: `N/A`<br>_
Open the C# file and start using normal intellisense triggers with CS-Script specific symbols: _hover, go-to-definition, autocompletion_.

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

_**Enabling C# IntelliSense**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: load project`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "load project" command (ctrl+F7):

_Note: currently VSCode project model does not allow programmatic opening of a project/folder and a file. Thus initially you need to trigger "load project" command twice to achieve the desired outcome. First time to load the folder and second time to load the file. But after the project/folder is loaded activating a C# IntelliSense is always a single step operation. This minor limitation is going to be addressed in the future releases. Providing VSCode team will cooperate._   

<hr>

## Limitations
_**Project structure**_<br>
VSCode is a subject to a serious limitation - the project model is based on a folder and doesn't allow any customization. To put it simple, VSCode executes/debugs folders while CS-Script files. While the extension completely overcomes this limitation for execution and debugging, the Intellisense support is only enabled when OmniSharp project is loaded. To make it easier _CS-Script.VSCode_ allows generation and loading required OmniSharp project in a single-step (`load project` command or `ctrl+7`). Though in the future the solution most likely will be extended to overcome this limitation as well.

_**C# 7**_<br>
The extension comes with C# 7 support (via Roslyn) enabled by default. However Roslyn has an unfortunate limitation - it is extremely heavy and slow on startup. Thus it can take ~3-5 seconds to do the first compilation of a script. 

Roslyn team did a good job by caching runtime instances of the compilers thus any consequent compilations will require only milliseconds to be accomplished. Unfortunately on Linux/Mono the same caching mechanism is not available so the compilation will consistently take up to 1.5 seconds (tested on VMWare Mint 18.1 4GB RAM on i7-5500U 2*2.40 GHz). Hopefully Roslyn team will extend runtime caching in the future releases of Mono. 

Note, the Roslyn startup delay has no affect on script **execution**. CS-Script uses application level JIT compilation (similar to Python caching) that avoids compiling scripts if they are not changed since the lats execution.  

<hr>

## Road map (details)
- Intelligence support for classless scripts. Currently classless scripts can only be executed and debugged but not "intellisensed": 
    ```C#
    using System;
                         
    void main()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Hello World!";
    }
    ```      
- Support for non-C# CS-Script specific autocompletion and "Go to Definition". For example CS-Script directives:
    ```
    //css_include <script_path>  
    //css_reference <assembly_path>  
    //css_nuget <package_name>  
    ```
- Depending on the depth of the OmnySharp and VSCode customization the solution will need to support (in one or another way) Intelligence for a single loaded C# file without loading an OmniSharp project.

    Though in the future the solution most likely will be extended with a complimentary CS-Script's own Roslyn-based Intellisense engine. This will allow Intellisesne support for classless and non-project C# scripts.

Commit message:

Updated readme.md. Added disclaimer about enabling the Intellisense.

README.md, after:

# CS-Script - VSCode Extension (CS-Script.VSCode)

Execution, debugging and editing C# code that targets .NET and Mono (no .NET Core required).     
<hr/>
Note this extension depends on "ms-vscode.mono-debug" and "ms-vscode.csharp". Thus if these extensions are installed/function incorrectly please log error reports at their web sites. 

Please be aware that currently the extension does not provide its own _Intellisense_ functionality and instead relies on VSCode built-in _Intellisense_ engine OmniSharp. See **_Enabling C# IntelliSense_** section below for the instructions on how to activate _Intellisense_ for a loaded C# file.   
<hr/>
Currently VSCode support for C# is heavily oriented on development for .NET Core (e.g. ASP.NET Core). This imposes serious limitations on developers who is developing for desktop and server using C#. This project is aiming for filling this gap.

The extension is powered by the [CS-Script engine](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script/blob/master/README.md) - popular Open Source script engine that delivers Python scripting experience but for C# syntax. CS-Script uses ECMA-compliant C# as a programming language and it can be hosted by applications or run standalone. CS-Script is already a core of the plugins for some other popular editors/IDEs: 

- Sublime Text 3 - [CS-Script.ST3](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script-sublime/blob/master/README.md) 
- Notepad++  -  [CS-Script.Npp](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.npp/blob/master/README.md)
- Visual Studio 2015/2017 - [CS-Script.VSIX](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/CS-Script.VSIX/blob/master/README.md)

The extension provides a very thin layer of own functionality. Its primary responsibility is bringing together OmniSharp IntelliSense services, a full scale debugger (curtesy of "Mono Debug" team) and CS-Script seamless C# script execution. This page contains only a light overview of the extension functionality. The complete description can be found at the [project Wiki](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/wiki).

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

<hr>

## Minimal set of dependencies (third-party extensions)
Latest Mono from http://www.mono-project.com/download/ and the following VSCode extensions:

Note, you may need to add Mono to the system path manually if it didn't happen for you during the Mono installation. 

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/dependencies.png)
<hr>

## Functionality

- _**Editing**_ <br>
All C# editing support available with OmniSharp, including Syntax Highlighting, IntelliSense, Go to Definition, Find All References, etc.

- _**Debugging**_<br>
Debugging support for .NET (Mono and Desktop CLR). This is something that currently  is impossible with other extensions.

- _**Execution**_<br>
All CS-Script features:
    - Direct execution of "plain vanilla" C# files without defining any project infrastructure.
    - Converting/Building a script into an assembly or a self contained executable.
    - Inclusion of the dependency scripts via CS-Script directives:
        - Importing other C# scripts
        - Referencing assemblies either explicitly or implicitly via automatic resolving namespaces into assemblies
        - Referencing NuGet packages

- _**Portability**_<br>
The extension is supported on all OSs where VSCode can run.

### **Road map (highlights)**
Below are the road map highlights only. Some more detailed information are available in the last section of this document.
- Add support fro C# 7 just out of box. (**_Done in v1.2.0_**)
- Add toolbar buttons for most frequent CS-Script commands. (**_Done in v1.2.0_**)
- Adding a [custom view](https://code.visualstudio.com/updates/v1_13#_custom-views)  containing all script dependencies (e.g. imported scripts, DLLs) (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Integrate CS-Script specific autocompletion with default C# autocompletion (OmniSharp). (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Integrate CS-Script run/debug commands with the default launch actions. (**_Done in v1.3.0_**)
- Allow fallback autocompletion (similar to Sublime Text) when OmniSharp is not activated.
- Allow OmniSharp autocompletion to be integrated without loading the folder. May not be possible due to the OmniSharp limitations.  

<hr>

## C# scripting with VSCode

_CS-Script.VSCode_ allows convenient editing and execution of the C# code directly from the editor. A "C# script" is a file containing any ECMA-compliant C# code. While other C# based runtimes require C# code to be compiled into assemblies CS-Script allows direct C# execution by generating the assemblies on-fly. Thus you don't need to have any script specific configuration for executing your script. A single script file is fully sufficient as it contains everything that CS-Script needs to know to execute the script.

When your C# script depend on other (source code or compiled) C# modules you can express this in your code in a very simple way via `//css_*` directives. These directives are conceptually similar to Python `import *`, which appear on top of the script. CS-Script has only a handful directives that are easy to remember. And of course you can find the complete CS-Script documentation on GigHub: https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script/wiki

The following is the overview of the CS-Script functionality available with VS Code. The overview also highlights the major CS-Script featured:

Note: the most frequently used CS-Script command can also be accessed directly via toolbar buttons without using 'command palette': 

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/toolbar.png)

Be aware that apart from allowing typical C# Intellisense this extension also provides C-Script specific code assistance features (mouse hover, go-to-definition and autocompletion):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

## Usage

_**Installing**_<br>
While the extension is already published on VSCode marketplace it may take some time until it becomes publicly available. Until then you can install the extension from VSIX (from GitGub).

_**Executing**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: run`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "run" command (Ctrl+F5):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_run1.gif)

_**Check for syntax errors**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: check`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "check" command (F7):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_check.gif)

_**Debugging**_<br>
_Command: `Debug: Start Debugging`<br>_
Open the C# file and load it with "cs-script: load project" command (Ctrl+F7). After that you can start debugging the same way as with any VSCode workspace/language: by pressing F5 (Debug: Start Debugging command):

_**Debugging (without workspace)**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: debug`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "debug" command (Alt+F5):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_debug1.gif)

_**Managing Dependencies**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: print project`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "print project" command (Alt+F7):

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_projA.gif)


![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/vscode_projB.gif)

_**Using CS-Script IntelliSense**_<br>
_Command: `N/A`<br>_
Open the C# file and start using normal intellisense triggers with CS-Script specific symbols: _hover, go-to-definition, autocompletion_.

![](https://github.com/oleg-shilo/cs-script.vscode/raw/master/images/cs-s_intellisense.gif)

_**Enabling C# IntelliSense**_<br>
_Command: `cs-script: load project`<br>_
Open the C# file and execute "load project" command (ctrl+F7):

_Note: currently VSCode project model does not allow programmatic opening of a project/folder and a file. Thus initially you need to trigger "load project" command twice to achieve the desired outcome. First time to load the folder and second time to load the file. But after the project/folder is loaded activating a C# IntelliSense is always a single step operation. This minor limitation is going to be addressed in the future releases. Providing VSCode team will cooperate._   

<hr>

## Limitations
_**Project structure**_<br>
VSCode is a subject to a serious limitation - the project model is based on a folder and doesn't allow any customization. To put it simple, VSCode executes/debugs folders while CS-Script files. While the extension completely overcomes this limitation for execution and debugging, the Intellisense support is only enabled when OmniSharp project is loaded. To make it easier _CS-Script.VSCode_ allows generation and loading required OmniSharp project in a single-step (`load project` command or `ctrl+7`). Though in the future the solution most likely will be extended to overcome this limitation as well.

_**C# 7**_<br>
The extension comes with C# 7 support (via Roslyn) enabled by default. However Roslyn has an unfortunate limitation - it is extremely heavy and slow on startup. Thus it can take ~3-5 seconds to do the first compilation of a script. 

Roslyn team did a good job by caching runtime instances of the compilers thus any consequent compilations will require only milliseconds to be accomplished. Unfortunately on Linux/Mono the same caching mechanism is not available so the compilation will consistently take up to 1.5 seconds (tested on VMWare Mint 18.1 4GB RAM on i7-5500U 2*2.40 GHz). Hopefully Roslyn team will extend runtime caching in the future releases of Mono. 

Note, the Roslyn startup delay has no affect on script **execution**. CS-Script uses application level JIT compilation (similar to Python caching) that avoids compiling scripts if they are not changed since the lats execution.  

<hr>

## Road map (details)
- Intelligence support for classless scripts. Currently classless scripts can only be executed and debugged but not "intellisensed": 
    ```C#
    using System;
                         
    void main()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Hello World!";
    }
    ```      
- Support for non-C# CS-Script specific autocompletion and "Go to Definition". For example CS-Script directives:
    ```
    //css_include <script_path>  
    //css_reference <assembly_path>  
    //css_nuget <package_name>  
    ```
- Depending on the depth of the OmnySharp and VSCode customization the solution will need to support (in one or another way) Intelligence for a single loaded C# file without loading an OmniSharp project.

    Though in the future the solution most likely will be extended with a complimentary CS-Script's own Roslyn-based Intellisense engine. This will allow Intellisesne support for classless and non-project C# scripts.
